Summary:The Rules Framed under the “Trace Unions Act,1926 impose obligation on the registered Trade Unions  to submit annual statucory return in the prescribed format to the Registrar of their respective States! It is based on the Annual Returns received from the Registrar of Trade Unions of the respective States/Union Territories. am thankful to the Registrar of Trade Unions of all the responding State GovernmenUnion Territory without, whose support it would not have been  sible to bring out this Report. The government of India passed the “Trade Unions Act,1926" to regulate conditions governing the registration of Trade Unions, obligations imposed on a registered Trade Unions and right and liabilities there of. 29.6 percent of the total registered unions . Growth of Workers Unions  ‘+ Out of 16098 Workers Unions, 94.3 per cent were State Unions and remaining 5.7 per cent were Central Unions ,  ‘© Only 4785 Workers Unions  had submitted the returns . 99.7 per cent belong to Workers and remaining 56  unions were Employers ,  ‘© Among States/Union Territories, Karnataka accounted for the largest number of registered Trade Unions  . Finances, Assets and     jes of Trade Unions  ‘= All the 4785 trade unions submitting returns had income of ® 67 Crore against the expenditure of € 62.8 Crore respectively.1.1 Coverage The coverage of the Act is confined to =   Only persons engaged in Trade or Business  can form a trade union or become members of the trade union, As such persons employed in Raj Bhawan for domestic and other duties cannot form a trade union. The Act gave legal status to the Registered ‘Trade Unions and conferred on them and their members a measure of immunity from Civil Suit and Criminal prosecution. From the beginning itself, Trade Unions were not confined to workers alone, From 19" Century itself there were Employer's associations in the form of Chamber of ‘Commerce, Industrial Associations etc. Chapter I s     ent Features of the Trade Unions Act, 1926  ‘Trade Unions are organization of Workers as well as Employers formed to protect and promote the interest of theit members, Trade Unions have made headway due to rapid individual development.Registrar : A Registrar of trade unions appointed by the appropriate government under section 3, and includes any Additional or Deputy Registrar of trade unions,  1.2.4, Executive: Executive means the body, by whatever name called, to which the management of the affairs of a trade union is entrusted,  1.2.8. 1.2.2 Appropriate Government: - Appropriate Government means in relation to trade unions whose subjects are not confined to one state, the Central Government and in relation to other trade unions, the State government. Trade dispute :- Trade dispute means any dispute  between employers and workmen, ot  between workmen and workmen, or  _ between employers and employers, which is connected with i) employment or non-employment, or ii) the terms of employment, or i) the conditions of labour, of any person  1.2.6. 1.2 Important, Definition, Concepts and Provisions of the Act     ‘Trade Union: - Trade Union means any combination, whether temporary or permanent, formed primarily for the purpose of regulating the relation  between workmen and employers, or  between workmen and ‘workmen, or  between employers and employers or for imposing restrictive conditions on the conduct of any trade or business.But he cannot be an office bearer of the trade union until, he attains the age of 18 vyears. 1.2.11, Cancellation of Registration  A certificate of registration of a trade union may be withdrawn or cancelled by the Registrar  on the application of the trade union to be Verified in such a manner as may be prescribed and  if the Registrar is satisfied that the certificate has been obtained by fraud or mistake or that trade      4    A Corporation  established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act which is owned or controlled or managed by the Government and  iv) A local authority  1.2.8. As such persons employed in Raj Bhawan for domestic and other duties cannot form a trade union.Dissolution  i) When a registered trade union is dissolved, notice of the dissolution signed by 7 members and by the Secretary of the trade union shall, within 14 days of the dissolution be sent to the Registrar, and shall be registered by him if he is satisfied that the dissolution has been effected in accordance with the rules of the trade union, and the dissolution shall have effect, from the date of such registration  ii) Where the dissolution of a registered trade union has been registered and the rules of the trade union do not provide for the distribution of funds of trade union on dissolution, the Registrar shall divide the funds amongst the members in such a manner as may be prescribed. ii) The Act also provides for constitution of a separate fund for political purposes,  The trade unions are given immunity from civil suits in certain cases     iv) ‘The members of trade unions ean inspect the books of trade unions  v) The trade unions can be amalgamated, provided votes of at least one half of the members of each or every such trade union entitled to vote is recorded,     Limitations     1.3.1 Limitations:- Under the Trade Unions Act, 1926, the registration of a trade union is not obligatory. 1.2.13, Other prov     ns of the Act  i) The Act clearly defines the rights and liabilities of registered trade union. During 2011 only 27% of the registered trade unions from 10 StatesUnion Territories have submitted retums in the prescribed proformae to the concerned authorities.2.2 Growth of Workers’ Unions  2.2.1 Number and Membership of Workers Unions  State-wise data in respect of workers registered trade unions submitting returns and their sex-wise membership during 2012 is given in Table 3.1 During 2012, out of 16154 registered workers unions, only 4785 unions  had submitted the returns. Chapter - 2  Growth of Trade Unions 2.1 Growth of Trade Unions   2.1.1  Year-wise number of Registered Trade Unions and their membership  Information relating to number of registered trade unions, number of unions submitting returns and their membership from 1996 to 2012 is given in Table 2.1. Out of the total of 16154 registered unions, as many as 16098 unions  were of Workers Unions and remaining 56  were of Employers’ Unions, Out of 16098 Workers Unions, 94.3 per cent were State Unions and remaining 5.7 per cent were Central Unions, State Unions are those unions, whose activitiesobjectives beyond a State boundary. 2.2.2 State-wise distribution of Central Unions and State Unions  Table 3.1 also presents number and membership of workers trade unions separately for Central Unions and State Unions, It may be seen from the table that during 2012, out of 4785 unions submitting returns as many as 4524  were state unions and remaining 261  were Central Unions.2.2.4 Workers Trade Unions in Public Sector  State-wise statistics pertaining to the number of Workers’ Unions submitting returns and their membership in Public Sector separately for State Sphere and Central Sphere for the Year 2012 is given in Table 3.3. Women members accounted for 29.54 per cent of the total membership of Central and State Unions, Amongst State Unions, the membership of Women Workers was the highest in Kerala  followed by Assam . Sex-wise and Industry-wise  number of workers unions submitting returns and their membership for the year 2012 is presented in Table 3.2. Summary of this statement at major industry division  is given in Table-1.1     From Table | .1_ it is seen that ‘Manufacturing Group’ accounted for 37.1 per cent of the total number of unions submitting returns, followed by “Transportation and Storage’ .